MCO-1587: add runbook for ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory (#242)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/machine-config-operator/ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory.md

# ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning
This alert becomes pending when a control plane
node is detected to be using more then 90%
of its total available memory. If the control
plane node continues to use memory above the
90% threshold for 45 minutes, the alert will fire.

## Impact

> The memory utilization per instance within control

Reviewer: To simplify it a little
```suggestion
The memory usage per instance within control
```

Author: Fixed.

> The memory utilization per instance within control
> plane nodes influence the stability
> and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
> Kubernetes API Server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
> which negatively influences the pod scheduling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The memory utilization per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
which negatively influences the pod scheduling.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Diagnosis
This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query.

Targeting any node with the role of master,
prometheus sums the free memory left
on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on that node.

Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value from each
master node by 100 and this value is the total percentage

> of memory used by the control plane node. If this value
> is larger then a certain percentage for a certain period
> of time then prometheus will fire the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of memory used by the control plane node. If this value
is larger than a certain percentage for a certain period
of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.
```

Author: Fixed.

> To diagnose why the control plane nodes is using a high

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To diagnose why the control plane node is using a high
```

Author: Fixed.

amount of memory. You can investigate the following:

> - The `oc describe` command will get a large

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `oc describe` command will retrieve a large
```

Author: Fixed.

> variety of data on nodes such as current pods
> scheduled on the node and its current
> memory/cpu requests. It will also list the

Reviewer: removed one "current" to avoid repetition
```suggestion
variety of data on nodes, such as current pods
scheduled on the node and its 
memory/cpu requests. It will also list the
```

Author: Fixed.

> allocated resources total on the node and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
total allocated resources on the node and
```

> how much it's currently using. You can run

Reviewer: I would use "it is" for slightly more formal tone.
```suggestion
how much it is currently using. You can run
```

Author: Fixed.

a script to get a list of all control plane
nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
statistics.

  ```console
  $ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
  ```

> - For kubelet-level commands you can get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For kubelet-level commands, you can get
```

Author: Fixed.

the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune the command to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

> - For troubleshooting individual nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For troubleshooting individual nodes,
```

Author: Fixed.

> you can ssh or `oc debug` into the control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can SSH or `oc debug` into the control
```

Author: Fixed.

Author: Fixed.

> plane node and use commands such as top

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plane node and use commands such as `top`
```

Author: Fixed.

to diagnose memory usage.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```
- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

- Another reason that the memory could
be high on the control planes is because of
`etcd`. Acting as the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is
constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
plane node. Because of the amount of data

> and querying etcd keeps track of this can lead to high memory usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and querying etcd keeps track of, this can lead to high memory usage.
```

Author: Fixed.

> In order to make sure etcd is running smoothly.
> You can check the response time of etcd and
> health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure etcd is running smoothly,
you can check the response time of etcd and
health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
```

Author: Fixed.

  ```console
  $ oc -n openshift-etcd rsh <etcd-pod-name>
  # etcdctl member list -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint health -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint status -w table
  ```
  You can also get the amount of objects that etcd is storing via this command.
  ```console
  $ oc exec -n openshift-etcd <etcd-pod> -c etcd -n openshift-etcd -- etcdctl --command-timeout=160s get / --prefix --keys-only |sed '/^$/d' | cut -d/ -f3,4 | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn |head
  ```
  You can also use the [fio tool](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices)
  to check the disk performance for the storage disks backing etcd.

## Mitigation

> - Make sure your control plane nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensure your control plane nodes
```

Author: Fixed.

are appropriately sized for your environment. Red Hat
offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
increase the control plane nodes memory size
to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
can troubleshoot the issue.

> - Because etcd is crucial to how the cluster runs. Red Hat

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Because etcd is crucial to how the cluster runs, Red Hat
```

Author: Fixed.

has [documented](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#recommended-etcd-practices_recommended-etcd-practices)

> the reccomended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the recommended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Meaning
This alert becomes pending when a control plane
node is detected to be using more then 90%
of its total available memory. If the control
plane node continues to use memory above the
90% threshold for 45 minutes, the alert will fire.

## Impact
The memory usage per instance within control
plane nodes influences the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
which negatively influences the pod scheduling.

## Diagnosis
This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query.

Targeting any node with the role of master,
prometheus sums the free memory left
on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on that node.

Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value from each
master node by 100 and this value is the total percentage
of memory used by the control plane node. If this value
is larger than a certain percentage for a certain period
of time, Prometheus will fire the alert.

To diagnose why the control plane node is using a high

> amount of memory. You can investigate the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
amount of memory, you can investigate the following:
```

Author: Fixed.

  ```
  You can also use the [fio tool](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices)
  to check the disk performance for the storage disks backing etcd.

## Mitigation
- Ensure your control plane nodes
are appropriately sized for your environment. Red Hat
offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
increase the control plane nodes memory size
to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
can troubleshoot the issue.

- Because etcd is crucial to how the cluster runs, Red Hat
has [documented](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#recommended-etcd-practices_recommended-etcd-practices)

> the recomended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the recommended practices and requirements for optimal etcd performance.
```

# ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning
This alert becomes pending when a control plane
node is detected to be using more then 90%
of its total available memory. If the control
plane node continues to use memory above the
90% threshold for 45 minutes, the alert will fire.

## Impact
The memory utilization per instance within control
plane nodes influence the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API Server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
which negatively influences the pod scheduling.

> ## Diagnosis

Reviewer 3: Diagnosis should be about finding out what's causing the high memory usage (e.g. which processes).

Author: I guess I always interpreted that diagnosis is  explaining why the alert is firing, Then mitigation is more reserved for troubleshooting and figuring out how to get rid of the alert.

Technically it's how I wrote my other runbooks that have already merged to master 

Iv'e written everyone here

Reviewer 3: This is similar to my comment above. TL;DR: we don't have a useful template for runbooks. The [example.md](https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/blob/master/example.md) file is too narrow IMHO.

IMHO diagnosis is about finding why the alert is fired and mitigation about how to fix the issue.

Author: I see your point. Let me see if I can do some refactoring of my current article as you noted below

Author: Did some reformatting.

This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query. The

> full query is as follows:

Reviewer 3: there's a risk that the expression gets updated over time leaving this documentation out of date.

Author: So is the general idea that we should leave any prometheus expressions outside of runbooks? I feel explaining what a query is composed of and what metrics it's pulling from would help a casual customer understand why the alert is firing but I'll defer to you since you work with prometheus.

Author: So do you think I should remove the query and any sentences that reference it or could I make reference to how memory usage for a node is calculated?

So i.e

something like this so it's less verbose and doesn't reference the query values if those do change. 

~~~
Targeting any node
with the role of master, a nodes memory usage is a sum of the free memory left
on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on that node.

Prometheus then multiplies the resulting value from each
master node by 100 to get the percentage of total memory uses
~~~

Reviewer 4: hopefully the alert's baked-in details cover things at the level of "it's a percent" and "it's been >90% for a while".  What we want to focus in the runbook is the big-picture "control planes need memory to function, and the node where it's tight is leaving you with little capacity to burst under load" to help orient a responding admin.  And then the low-level details about root-causing and/or mitigating that we didn't have time to get into in the alert message, or where our recommendations might evolve independently from what's baked into the alert.  Things like a natural-language rephrase of the PromQL `expr` are better versioned alongside the `expr` being explained.

Author: I removed the query but I kept how prometheus is calculating memory usage. Let me know what you think.

with the role of master, from the value
of 1 prometheus subtracts, the free memory left
on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the total amount of memory available on that node.

Prometheus then multiple the resulting value from each
master node by 100 and if any of the
master nodes have a result greater then
90 then the alert will become pending. If
the query continues to return any single master node
above 90 for 45 minutes straight then the alert will fire.

Because this is a comparator operation, if the
condition is not met, there will be no datapoints
displayed by the query.

## Mitigation
- Make sure your control plane nodes
are appropriately sized for your environment. Red Hat
offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
increase the control plane nodes memory size
to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
can troubleshoot.

> - The `oc describe` command will get a large

Reviewer 3: feels more like diagnosis?

Author: Did some reformatting.

variety of data on nodes such as current pods
scheduled on the node and its current
memory/cpu requests. It will also list the
allocated resources total on the node and
how much it's currently using. You can run
a script to get a list of all control plane
nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
statistics.

  ```console
  $ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
  ```

> - For kubelet-level commands you can get

Reviewer 3: same here

Author: Did some reformatting.

the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune the command to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

> - For troubleshooting individual nodes

Reviewer 3: same here

Author: Fixed.

you can ssh or `oc debug` into the control
plane node and use commands such as top
to diagnose memory usage.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```

> - You can use Prometheus to deep

Reviewer 3: same here

Author: Did some reformatting.

# ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning
This alert becomes pending when a control plane
node is detected to be using more then 90%
of its total available memory. If the control
plane node continues to use memory above the

> 90% threshold for 45 minutes then the alert will fire.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
90% threshold for 45 minutes, the alert will fire.
```

Author: Fixed.

## Impact
The memory utilization per instance within control
plane nodes influence the stability
and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibily in the etcd and
Kubernetes API Server pods. Moreover, OOM kill is expected
which negatively influences the pod scheduling.

## Diagnosis

> This alert is triggered by an expression
> which consists of a Prometheus query. The

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This alert is triggered by an expression
that consists of a Prometheus query. The
```

Author: Fixed.

full query is as follows:

```console
(
  1
    -
  sum by (instance) (
  node_memory_MemFree_bytes
  + node_memory_Buffers_bytes
  + node_memory_Cached_bytes
  AND on (instance)
  label_replace( kube_node_role{role="master"}, "instance", "$1", "node", "(.+)" )
  ) / sum by (instance) (
  node_memory_MemTotal_bytes
  AND on (instance)
  label_replace( kube_node_role{role="master"}, "instance", "$1", "node", "(.+)" )
  )
) * 100 > 90
```
The query can be broken down as follows. From the value

> of 1 we are subtracting the sum of any node

Reviewer 5: Who is "we"? The MCO?
??
```suggestion
of 1, the MCO subtracts the sum of any node
```

Author: Changed to prometheus

> with the role of master; the free memory left

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
with the role of master, the free memory left
```

Author: Fixed.

on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the sum of any nodes with the role master.

> The total amount of memory available on that node.

Reviewer 5: > The total amount of memory available on that node.

Incomplete sentence. 

... is the total amount of memory available on that node.
The total amount of memory available on that node  is....

Author: Fixed.

> We then multiple the resulting value from each

Reviewer 5: Who is "We"? The MCO?

> We then multiple the resulting value from each

Reviewer 5: Who is "We"?
??
```suggestion
The MCO multiplies the resulting value from each
```

Author: Changed to Prometheus

master node by 100 and if any of the
master nodes have a result greater then
90 then the alert will become pending. If
the query continues to return any single master node
above 90 for 45 minutes straight then the alert will fire.

Because this is a comparator operation, if the
condition is not met, there will be no datapoints
displayed by the query.

## Mitigation
- Make sure your control plane nodes
are appropriately sized for your environment. Red Hat
offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can
increase the control plane nodes memory size
to allow the control plane to stabilize so you
can troubleshoot.

- The `oc describe` command will get a large
variety of data on nodes such as current pods
scheduled on the node and its current
memory/cpu requests. It will also list the
allocated resources total on the node and

> how much its currently using. You can run

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
how much it is currently using. You can run
```
OR
```suggestion
how much it's currently using. You can run
```

Author: Fixed.

a script to get a list of all control plane

> nodes and only see the memory and allocation

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
nodes and to see only the memory and allocation
```

Author: Fixed.

statistics.

  ```console
  $ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
  ```
- For kubelet-level commands you can get
the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.

> You can further tune it to look at

Reviewer 5: Ambiguous _it_.
??
```suggestion
You can further tune the command to look at
```

Author: Fixed.

individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

> - For individual troubleshooting nodes

Reviewer 5: This sounds like a troubleshooting node is a thing. I don't think that is what you mean. 
??
```suggestion
- For troubleshooting individual nodes
```

Author: Fixed.

you can ssh or `oc debug` into the control
plane node and use commands such as top

> to diagnose memory usage

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
to diagnose memory usage.
```

Author: Fixed.

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```
- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

- Another reason that the memory could
be high on the control planes is because of

> `etcd`. Acting at the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is

Reviewer 5: ??
```suggestion
`etcd`. Acting as the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is
```

Author: Fixed.

constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control

> plane node. Becaues of the amount of data

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
plane node. Because of the amount of data
```

> plane node. Becaues of the amount of data
> and querying etcd keeps track of this can lead to high memory usage.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
plane node. Because of the amount of data
and querying etcd keeps track of this can lead to high memory usage.
```
OR
```suggestion
plane node. The amount of data
and querying that etcd tracks can lead to high memory usage.
```

Author: Went with first suggestion.

In order to make sure etcd is running smoothly.
You can check the response time of etcd and
health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
  ```console
  $ oc -n openshift-etcd rsh <etcd-pod-name>
  # etcdctl member list -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint health -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint status -w table
  ```
  You can also get the amount of objects that etcd is storing via this command.
  ```console
  $ oc exec -n openshift-etcd <etcd-pod> -c etcd -n openshift-etcd -- etcdctl --command-timeout=160s get / --prefix --keys-only |sed '/^$/d' | cut -d/ -f3,4 | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn |head
  ```

>   finally you can use the [fio tool](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can also use the [fio tool](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices)
```

Author: Fixed.

# ExtremelyHighIndividualControlPlaneMemory

## Meaning
This alert becomes pending when a control plane
node is detected to be using more then 90%

> of it's total available memory. If the control

Reviewer 4: [Another][1] "it's" -> "its".  Also one more down around line 77.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/runbooks/pull/242#discussion_r1994421939

Author: Fixed.

plane node continues to use memory above the
90% threshold for 45 minutes then the alert will fire.

## Impact
The memory utilization per instance within control

> plane nodes influence the stability,

Reviewer 4: nit: "stability, and responsiveness" -> "stability and responsiveness"

Author: Fixed

and responsiveness of the cluster.
This can lead to cluster instability and slow responses from

> kube-apiserver or failing requests especially on etcd.

Reviewer 4: nit: you're talking about stabillity and responsiveness in the previous sentence.  Maybe work in a Kube-API-server/etcd highlight there, so you don't have to echo those issues in this second sentence?  Something like:

> The memory utilization per instance within control plane nodes influences the stability and responsiveness of the cluster, most visibly in the etcd and Kubernetes API server pods.

Author: Changed the wording.

plane node and use commands such as top
to diagnose memory usage

  ```console
  $ oc debug node/<node>
  $ chroot /host
  $ top -b -n100 -d2
  ```
- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

- Another reason that the memory could
be high on the control planes is because of
`etcd`. Acting at the primary datastore for the cluster state, etcd is
constantly being checked and updated by the Kube API to
match the current cluster state. An etcd pod runs on each control
plane node. Becaues of the amount of data
and querying etcd keeps track of this can lead to high memory usage.
In order to make sure etcd is running smoothly.
You can check the response time of etcd and
health status with commands run directly on the etcd pods.
  ```console
  $ oc -n openshift-etcd rsh <etcd-pod-name>
  # etcdctl member list -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint health -w table
  # etcdctl endpoint status -w table
  ```
  You can also get the amount of objects that etcd is storing via this command.
  ```console

>   oc exec -n openshift-etcd <etcd-pod> -c etcd -n openshift-etcd -- etcdctl --command-timeout=160s get / --prefix --keys-only |sed '/^$/d' | cut -d/ -f3,4 | sort | uniq -c | sort -rn |head

Author: Fixed

(
  1
    -
  sum by (instance) (
  node_memory_MemFree_bytes
  + node_memory_Buffers_bytes
  + node_memory_Cached_bytes
  AND on (instance)
  label_replace( kube_node_role{role="master"}, "instance", "$1", "node", "(.+)" )
  ) / sum by (instance) (
  node_memory_MemTotal_bytes
  AND on (instance)
  label_replace( kube_node_role{role="master"}, "instance", "$1", "node", "(.+)" )
  )
) * 100 > 90
```

The query can be broken down as follows. From the value
of 1 we are subtracting the sum of any node
with the role of master; the free memory left
on the node, the buffer memory on the node,
and the cached memory on the node. This is
divided by the sum of any nodes with the role master.
The total amount of memory available on that node.

We then multiple the resulting value from each
master node by 100 and if any of the
master nodes have a result greater then
90 then the alert will become pending. If
the query continues to return any single master node
above 90 for 45 minutes straight then the alert will fire.

Because this is a comparator operation, if the
condition is not met, there will be no datapoints
displayed by the query.

## Mitigation

- Make sure your control plane nodes

> are appropriatly sized for your environment. Red Hat

Reviewer 4: nit: "appropriatly" -> "appropriately"

Author: Fixed.

offers [sizing and scaling guidelines](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/latest/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2)
for clusters of various sizes.

- In the event this alert is firing
and the cluster it extremely unstable, you can

> increase the  control plane nodes memory size

Reviewer 4: nit: "the" currently followed by a double space, when it should be a single space.  Also "nodes" -> "node's"

Author: Fixed.

> to allow the control plane to stabalize so you

Reviewer 4: nit: "stabalize" -> "stabilize"

Author: Fixed.

can troubleshoot.

- The `oc describe` command will get a large
variety of data on nodes such as current pods

> scheduled on the node and it's current

Reviewer 4: nit: "it's" -> "its"

Author: Fixed.

memory/cpu requests. It will also list the
allocated resources total on the node and
how much it's currently using. You can run
a script to get a list of all control plane
nodes and only see the memory and allocation
statistics with an awk script.

  ```console

>   $ for i in $(oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane --no-headers | awk '{print $1}'); do    echo " " ;   echo "----------$i description---------"  ;   echo " " ;   oc describe node $i ; done

Reviewer 4: nit: does not need `awk`, you can use:

```console
$ oc get nodes -l node-role.kubernetes.io/control-plane -o name | while read NODE; do printf -- '\n----------%s description---------\n\n' "${NODE}"; oc describe "${NODE}"; done
```

Author: Fixed

  ```
- For kubelet-level commands you can get
the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune it to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag and also
sort by memory from highest to
lowest by using the `--sort-by=memory` flag.

- For individual troubleshooting nodes
you can ssh or `oc debug` into the control
plane node and use commands such as top
to diagnose memory usage

   ```console

>      $ oc debug node/<node>

Reviewer 4: The additional indent vs. the wrapping triple-backticks is breaking rendering:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/94b58dde-7d9a-44aa-96f9-6bbf9d9cc0fe)

You want to consistently use two- or four-space indents for this whole block, both the triple-backticks and the wrapped commands.

Author: Fixed so it's all two spaces.

     $ chroot /host
     $ top -b -n100 -d2
   ```

- You can use Prometheus to deep
dive into the memory usage of nodes and
pods. Red Hat provides multiple pre-built
dashboards and PromQL queries to track
memory usage over time. All within the
`Observe` section of the OpenShift
console.

- Another reason that the memory could
be high on the control planes is because of
`etcd`. Acting at the primary datastore
for the cluster state, etcd is

> constantly being  checked and

Reviewer 4: nit: two spaces after "being" should be a single space.

updated by the Kube API to

> match the current cluster state.

Author: I agree, although I think all my previous runbook kind of suffer from this. I tried to make this runbook smaller and may need to go back and add more consistent line patterns but I did try and clean this up a little bit.

An etcd pod runs on each control
plane node. Becaues of the amount of data
and querying etcd keeps track of this can
lead to high memory usage. In order to make
sure etcd is running smoothly. Red Hat offers

> several tools for this such as a [script](https://github.com/peterducai/etcd-tools/blob/main/etcd-analyzer.sh)

Reviewer 4: Soft-promoting "download this shell script from a floating `main` branch on GitHub and maybe run it yourself" makes me jumpy.  If we think this tool is something users should run, can we package and ship it via some sort of signed/verifiable pipeline like our usual products?  Or link to something that talks through how to poke at etcd without being so exposed to download-and-run, so users are more likely to think over and approve each signed/verified command they run?  Or something.

Author: I see your point. I removed the github link and instead transformed the section into just using more commands run directly rather then downloading a script.

for analyzing etcd respond times
and amount of objects stored. As well

> as the [fio](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/4885641)

Reviewer 4: No need to send folks to a KCS, we [explain how to use `fio` vs. etcd in public docs][1].

[1]: https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/openshift_container_platform/4.18/html/scalability_and_performance/recommended-performance-and-scalability-practices-2#etcd-verify-hardware_recommended-etcd-practices

Author: Added doc link instead of KCS

which can be used to check the disk performance for the
storage disks backing etcd.

> 

Reviewer 4: nit: extra empty line which you can delete to save folks a byte when downloading 😅

Author: Fixed
